# Database Queries

## Topics

- Relational Databases
- Writing Basic SQL Queries
- Writing Basic Queries using Knex.js

## Assignment

For this lab you will:

- write SQL statements against a pre-populated database using an online tool. Once you have the correct SQL Statement for each query, write it inside the `queries.sql` file under the appropriate heading.
- write API endpoints to manage the `accounts` resource, including database logic

### Write Basic Queries

Visit [SQL Try Editor at W3Schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/Sql/tryit.asp?filename=trysql_select_top) using the **Google Chrome (or Chromium if you use Linux) browser** and write _SQL queries_ for the following requirements:

- find all customers with postal code 1010. Returns 3 records.
  (A)
  (
  SELECT \*
  FROM Customers
  WHERE PostalCode = '1010';
  )
  (Result)
  (
  Number of Records: 3
  CustomerID CustomerName ContactName Address City PostalCode Country
  12 Cactus Comidas para llevar Patricio Simpson Cerrito 333 Buenos Aires 1010 Argentina
  54 Océano Atlántico Ltda. Yvonne Moncada Ing. Gustavo Moncada 8585 Piso 20-A Buenos Aires 1010 Argentina
  64 Rancho grande Sergio Gutiérrez Av. del Libertador 900 Buenos Aires 1010 Argentina
  )

- find the phone number for the supplier with the id 11. Should be (010) 9984510.
  (A)
  (

)
(Result)
(

)

- list first 10 orders placed, sorted descending by the order date. The order with date 1997-02-12 should be at the top.
  (A)
  (

)
(Result)
(

)

- find all customers that live in London, Madrid, or Brazil. Returns 18 records.
  (A)
  (

)
(Result)
(

)

- add a customer record for _"The Shire"_, the contact name is _"Bilbo Baggins"_ the address is _"1 Hobbit-Hole"_ in _"Bag
  End"_, postal code _"111"_ and the country is _"Middle Earth"_.
  (A)
  (

)
(Result)
(

)

- update _Bilbo Baggins_ record so that the postal code changes to _"11122"_.
  (A)
  (

)
(Result)
(

)

**Clicking the `Restore Database` button in the page will repopulate the database with the original data and discard all changes you have made**.

### Write Accounts API

- Write CRUD endpoints for the `accounts` resource. Use the `db` object imported from `data/dbConfig.js` for database access via `knex`.
- Manually test your endpoints with a REST client like `Insomnia` or `Postman` to check they are working as expected.

#### Accounts Schema

| field  | data type        | metadata                                            |
| ------ | ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| id     | unsigned integer | primary key, auto-increments, generated by database |
| name   | string           | required, unique                                    |
| budget | numeric          | required                                            |

## Stretch Problems

The following exercises **require research**, the concepts needed to complete them have not been covered in class yet.

- Find a query to discover how many different cities are stored in the Customers table. Repeats should not be double counted. Should be 69.
- Find all suppliers who have names longer than 20 characters. Returns 11 records.
- Add a `query string` option to your `GET /api/accounts` endpoint. The `query string` may contain `limit`, `sortby` and `sortdir` keys. If these keys are provided, use these values to limit and sort the `accounts` which are selected from the database. Reference the docs for sorting and limiting in `knex`.

```js
// sample req.query object
{
  limit: 5,
  sortby: 'id',
  sortdir: 'desc'
}
```
